Okay, this is Ron Shorn interviewing Ray Newbern
at Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena,
California on June 16, 1993. Ray, for the record,
what's your full name? Ray Leon Newbern, Jr. And
where and when were you born? January 9, 1933, Rock
Island, Illinois. How did you get interested in
astronomy in the first place? I read a Sunday
Supplement in a newspaper when I was in the fourth
grade, probably at that time, in the old Herald
Examiner. Except I guess it was the Herald Express
in those days, before they combined with the
Examiner. Got very excited about this article
about the solar system. Started asking my folks
questions. They didn't know the answers. Said,
you know what you're supposed to do when you want
the answer to something, and we don't know the
answer, go to the library. So I started reading
books on astronomy, and the next thing I knew, I was
hooked. Okay. Did you keep that interest in
astronomy through high school? Yes, very much so.
Where did you go to high school, by the way?
Glendale High, Glendale, California. So where
did you go to undergraduate school? Well, just
tell me your schooling. I went to Caltech in
September of 1950. Got my bachelor's degree there
in 1954, a master's degree in 55. I did the
coursework for a doctorate. And then in the summer
of 56, I came to work at JPL rather than continuing
as I had in a couple of previous summers at Mount
Wilson Observatory because I was $3,500 in debt
and needed the money. JPL offered me twice as much
money as Mount Wilson. So I came to work at JPL. And
it turns out I never went back to school then. I
stayed at JPL. I've been here just over 37 years
now. What did JPL hire you to do? Well, the first job
I did that I was really looking at seriously was the
flame attenuation of electromagnetic
radiation. They were still doing radio guidance
in those days. And they were concerned about the
radio signals for guidance being attenuated by
the rocket plume. And so it was a problem in pure
physics. There was no real astronomy here, and
that's what I was doing that summer. Was that
Sergeant or Corporal? Actually, in those days, it
was, I think, a concern about both. Both were
certainly... Corporal was in the field, and
Sergeant was still under development.
When did When did JPL start getting interested in
astronomy? Well, the first action that I got
involved in that was really astronomy occurred
when Marsha Neugebauer and I wrote a series of
articles, or articles, but just position papers
on some of the things that we might do in space in
early 1958.
This was in response to Explorer 1 having gone up
and people starting to think ahead as to what it
might be possible to do with these newfangled
rockets and space probes. And the result of that
position paper, which was strictly an on-lab
thing, was that I was made part of a Tiger team set up
by Al Hipps in the fall of 1958. to formally look
into these problems of what should we do in our
studies of the solar system. And this all finally
resulted in Marsha and I writing the report 30-1,
which was the formal report of Al Hibbs' Tiger
Team, and we did the science section.
Okay, did that report have any, did anything come
out of that? Yeah, I mean, it was accepted by NASA,
and I think it was widely used initially as sort of
an outline of the things we ought to be attempting
to do in space. And it was very widely used and
quoted for a few years until we began to try to do
some of these things. Found some of them were a
little harder than we thought. But actually, I
think virtually everything in that report we
finally did. Maybe not quite on the time scale we
expected. Took a little longer, but we finally did
it all. When did you get to be able to start to do some
astronomy
at JPL? Well, we created an astronomy group here
in, I believe, 1961. People
were convinced that we needed some astronomers
around doing astronomy to maintain, I think,
recognition in the field and to give proper advice
and mostly we were concerned about the fact there
was almost no planetary astronomy going on in the
United States in those days we knew that we were
going to need ground-based support of the space
program no one else seemed willing to do it so we got
the idea well let's see what we can do in a small way
ourselves and when a small 16-inch The telescope
came on the market for, I believe, $8,000. It was
for sale by a private party here in the basin. I
talked the boss into buying it. Who was the boss?
And housing it. In those days, it was Al Hitz was the
division manager. Fred Eimer was his deputy. And,
gosh, who was the section manager? Shortly after
that, Luke Kaplan came on board as the section
manager. I think at the time this actually
happened, it was probably either Herb Trostle or
John Porter. All right, so you got this 16-inch and
where'd you put it? We looked at several
possibilities. I talked to Ira Bowen, and he had
agreed that we could use a site just north of the
100-inch dome on Mount Wilson. But, of course, we
would have been distinctly visitors, and he said
that their facilities were sufficiently loaded
and water was short, and we'd have to bring in
everything that we wanted to use and stay in the old
Mount Wilson Hotel and what have you. We looked at
Chileo, but we looked longest and hardest and
finally went in to Table Mountain because the
Smithsonian was just moving out. They had done
solar constant work there for some... 25 or 30
years, I guess. There were primitive facilities
there already, and the Forest Service was happy to
have someone take over the site. And, of course, we
had seeing studies as well for the site since it had
been one of the areas where Caltech had looked as a
possible site for the 200-inch reflector. And
they found that it was as good as Palomar from the
point of view of astronomical seeing, And at that
time, from the point of view of city lights, but it
was very close to the San Andreas Fault. So they
went to Palomar instead of to Table Mountain. But
we had all those seeing studies, and we knew it was a
good site. So we grabbed it.
Who were the early people that were hired on? I
guess High Spinrad was one of the earliest to come
in after you formed your astronomical section.
Yeah, High Spinrad, Bob Youngkin. Yourself, Ron
Scharn, were the first people that were involved.
We hired a man by the name of Charles Caveman. He
went by the name Chick, who would actually act as
the on-site manager, supervisor, holder of
hands, repairer of problems, and so on at the
mountain. I know where High and I came from. Do you
remember where Bob Youngkin came from? He was
actually working on his doctorate at UCLA at the
time, and he was married, family, and needed to
work, and so he was just working on his doctorate in
his spare time, and he did finally finish it years
later. I guess you got interested in planetary
astronomy right from the start, right? From the
Sunday supplement? That's true. Although when I
was a student at Caltech, my work and my interests
lay mostly in galactic structure and cosmology.
And my published work there, a major paper that I
did, was on the RR Lyrae variables in NGC 4147,
published in the AJ the year I came to work at the
lab. But here, of course, the interest was in
planetary, and I loved astronomy generally. So at
that time, it was easily possible for a person to
know everything there was to know about the field
of solar system astronomy, quite unlike today. So
I just sort of made myself a universalist on the
solar system. Back, say, in 1958 or 1960, your
opinion Did real, quote-unquote, astronomers
look down on planetary types? Very much so. Did you
feel inferior? Not really, no. Because you were
working on planets. I didn't think so. I thought
that most of the attitude that astronomers had was
because of a few unfortunate...
Articles of people who tended to follow Percival
Lowell's school of study of Mars and that the
Sunday supplements, in fact, even though one is
what attracted me to the field, had given the
people who were interested in the solar system a
bad name. But if one looked, one found people like
G.P. Kuiper, who was doing good, reputable work.
Of course, the people at Mount Wilson, like Dunham
and Adams and And Nicholson and Pettit had done
good work, solid physical, astrophysical work on
the planets throughout the 30s. And Kuiper picked
it up in the 40s. And it was a perfectly good, honest
field. It's just that it had gotten a little bit of a
bad rep that people who didn't know too much about
it tended to look at the infamous Lowellian school
of the solar system instead of the solid physical
work. Do you think planetary astronomy and the
planetary astronomers are considered
respectable today by the other astronomers? I
think very much so. I do not feel today that they
draw any distinction as to the quality of a person
because he works in the field of solar system
research rather than in stellar or galactic
research. I think that most modern astronomers
probably feel that This study may not be quite as
fundamental, shall we say, as studying the Big
Bang or trying to solve some of what they consider
basic problems of the first few seconds of the
universe or the missing mass or the great
attractor or the great celestial voids or what
have you, but I don't think they... They probably
look at it as sort of a different field, almost like
biology and chemistry are a different field, not
necessarily inferior, but just different and not
as interesting to them.
Again, back when you got started doing this, say
around 1960, what was planetary astronomy like in
the U.S.? It was almost non-existent. Really,
G.P. Kuiper... was the only one who was doing
modern physical observing of the planets at that
particular time that I can think of off the top of my
head. We had a very few people in celestial
mechanics, about six of them, I think. We had
Clements, and Brower, and Herget, and Herbig, not
Herbig, Robbie,
Herrick was the other one I was trying to think of.
That was just about it. Brown of the lunar theory
was dead by then. And in fact, there were so few
people even who knew celestial mechanics that
when the space program hit, the lab started
shipping people en masse back to a special summer
school that Dirk Brouwer held at Yale to teach
people what celestial mechanics was all about,
because the subject wasn't even taught at
Caltech, for example.
Where do you think planetary astronomy would be
now if it wasn't for the money NASA has spent in the
last 30 years? Obviously it would be a very, very
different field. I don't think, if we didn't have
the space program, I think there would still be a
few isolated individuals who would study the
planets from time to time. Anytime you get new
techniques, new instruments, new equipment,
Somebody's going to apply them to the obvious
objects that are near at hand, like the planets,
but I don't think it would have, well, much of our
knowledge has clearly been found by the space
probes. Possibly, I don't know, maybe a quarter as
much of it has been found from the ground. And I
don't think there would have been but a fraction of
that if it hadn't been for NASA and the space
program. I think the interest would not have been
there. The people wouldn't have been attracted to
the field. The telescopes wouldn't have been
available for this less interesting work, less
fundamental work as it were. I think it's, there's
no question that NASA and the coming space program
changed the whole field. Do you think that
planetary astronomy is a part of astronomy? Yes. I
do. I think that there are many people in the field
whose background is more geology or meteorology
than it is astronomy, but I think astronomers play
a particular role, especially in the study of
objects like comets and asteroids, the small
bodies of the solar system, where they're still
basically not looking at geological or
meteorological processes. And similarly, with
many of the satellites in the solar system, I think
we all have something And one of the interesting
things about modern solar system astronomy is
that it isn't just astronomy, but it's also
geology and meteorology. And I think everybody
works together very well. Back when this stuff
started in the early 60s, You were in a special
situation because JPL is actually a contractor to
NASA through Caltech. And how was astronomy
funded at JPL in those days? Did headquarters give
a block grant to Caltech to be given to JPL to be used
as JPL saw fit? Or did they say exactly what they
wanted done? This is in the early 60s when this
stuff began. I was, of course, a very junior person
at JPL in those days. I do not know for sure exactly
how it was funded. I know that initially I simply
got my money from my superiors, and if they thought
what I wanted to do was right, then they found me the
money to do it. So my guess is it was probably a block
grant. I know that when I began building the Table
Mountain Observatory and that I had a... brand, if
you will, although it was not the result of a
proposal. I simply sent a proposal to NASA, as it
were. It wasn't reviewed as they are today, and
they decided if what I proposed to do was
reasonable, and they sent me the money to run the
ground-based astronomy program at Table
Mountain, for example, and to fund a number of
people to work on it and work there. So in that
sense, it was a block grant, not to JPL. It came in
that case to me, and I was responsible for it. But
earlier, it had come to my bosses, and so I suppose
you would call that a block grant. It certainly was
not money to an individual to do a specific kind of
work. And how is it done today? Today, of course, it
is very much The individual who is funded, if the
individual leaves, the money goes with him or her.
And that money is on the basis of competitive
proposals to do specific things. And it is much
today as if you were working in a university going
to NASA or to the NSF for funds. It's a totally
different approach to doing the research.
in some ways is not as pleasant, of course. It was
much easier when if you saw something new and
exciting and interesting, you could jump into it
without having to worry about whether this was
covered in your proposal and exactly what you
would plan to do. But I suppose it also left
possibilities for people to not do exactly what
was right.
As I recall, back in the early 60s, those of us that
were observing kind of did what we could. There was
so much to do. How is it done today? I mean, does the
section chief or division chief say, we shall
study Pluto this year and everybody follows, or
since now everybody has to get grants on their own,
do they propose what they want to do? Individuals
propose what they want to do today. I think any
section manager in the science division at JPL who
tried to tell an individual what he had to work on
would sort of be laughed out of town, unless of
course he had money and the individual wanted the
money, then that's something else again. But in
general, It's left up to the individual today.
This is true to a large extent. However, in times
when billets become tight, then it may be that the
lab or the division or the section may decide that,
hey, we've got to cut back a little bit. And so they
may look at those activities which seem less
related to the flight programs of NASA and of the
laboratory and decide that, hey, let's not say
decide, let's sort of suggest to the person that if
he or she wants to continue in employment at the
lab, it might be better to look for a new field that
is more akin to the needs of the laboratory.
However, that person, of course, if he or she has
money, can take that money and go elsewhere and do
it. JPL never did get a big telescope on Table
Mountain. Not really, no. We tried, of course, and
that's a big story in and of itself. However, in
recent years, we did get from the Air Force the old
48-inch ALT-ALT-AS telescope that was at
Cloudcroft, and this now has been erected on Table
Mountain and, in fact, is going into regular
scheduled observation in about two weeks. There
is also a 40-inch reflector on Table Mountain that
is owned by Pomona College, And the time on that
telescope is available, half of the time is
available to the people at JPL. What
instrumentation, and also you have a 24-inch, is
that still in operation? 24-inch is very much in
operation. It's been the one instrument that has
produced pretty good science throughout all of
the years that Table Mountain has existed, which
number roughly 30 now. Well, of course, the
24-inch wasn't there initially. It came in a few
years later, but let's say 25 years. Yeah, it has a
large cu-day spectrograph on it, which was
heavily used at first, has been more lightly used
in recent years, but I guess there are people
planning to bring it back into full use again.
There's been a great deal of photoelectric
photometry, and imaging with CCDs and prior to
that Vidicon type detectors on the 24 inch. What
kind of foci do the 40 inch and 48 inch have that are
available? I've never seen the 40 inch. I have no
idea what is available there. In the case of the 48
inch, again, I haven't been on the mountain now in
more than 10 years. I have information here that I
can give you that shows the exact instrumentation
and foci and so on on the 48-inch, but I shouldn't
really say off the top of my head. We'll get to that
later. You mentioned that JPL's attempt to get a
decent-sized, not a big telescope, but a 100-inch
class. It's a long story. Let's talk about some of
that story. How did the idea start, or was it
obvious to everyone that you needed a dedicated
planetary telescope? Well, I think with all of us
here, it was obvious to us when we went out and tried
to get time on existing large telescopes that that
time simply was not available for planetary work.
All of the telescopes were very busy, and even in
those days there were more astronomers wanting
time than there was time available.
And when good young people could not get time at the
major instruments, it was pretty obvious that we
needed a major instrument of our own. And I
couldn't say that any one person was responsible
for that idea. It was a very obvious one. If you
can't get the time you need, you better build your
own. And that, in fact, was what was suggested by
people like Ira Bowen, who was then the director at
Mount Wilson. And he, in fact, helped a great deal
in pushing NASA into the idea that they needed to
build their own telescope for planetary
astronomy. He certainly agreed that there was
still a great deal of good, solid astrophysical
work on the planets that could be done with modern
equipment. He was, I think, a very honest,
straightforward, actually rather far-thinking
individual who recognized the fact that there was
a great deal left to be done from the ground, and he
gave a lot of good advice to NASA, suggesting that
they should go ahead and build their own
telescope.
I got Homer Newell to sign two things, and one was
for a telescope at the McDonald Observatory at the
University of Texas, and one was for what I thought
was going to be a telescope on Table Mountain.
whatever happened about that time in the
left-hand corner? Caltech, unfortunately, is
what happened. The feeling was that since we were
young and not well-known, and there were a lot of
famous astronomers at Caltech, that this ought to
be some kind of a joint effort between Caltech and
JPL. Unfortunately, what JPL wanted was a good
telescope in a good site that could get to work in a
hurry, doing astronomical research what caltech
wanted was a really new modern earth-shaking
telescope in the world's very best possible site
and their idea was to perhaps do a five-year seeing
survey and some work was actually done on that
telescopes were mounted at white mountain for
example for a time and We got information from
Berkeley, who had also mounted a seeing study up
there. But they really began looking for the
world's greatest site for a planetary telescope,
thinking that seeing was all important in
planetary detail work. And they had a very long
range plan. I think that what it finally came down
to was that their idea of what needed to be done and
ours were so different, and I think both Well, NASA
also wanted to get on the air, so to speak. So we
could never reach an agreement with Caltech that
we both felt comfortable with and finally wound
up, as I understood it, with money going to Hawaii,
which of course was a very superior site, as it
turned out. Right, but which had no astronomers
whatsoever except a few solar types. That's
right. Then there was another project that I guess
finally became the infrared telescope facility
in Lunakea, the light bucket. Do you remember the
light? JPL was going to build a light bucket. How
did that get started? Was it Frank Gray involved in
that or something? I never knew the details on that
one, Ron. I wish I had. Frank Gray was the assistant
section manager in those days, and he could very
well have been heavily involved in it. But by that
time, I was not heavily involved any longer in the
field. I had pushed hard to build a... I had even the
blueprints in my office for the 84-inch Kitt Peak,
which we were proposing to duplicate to save time.
Again, here was an existing working telescope,
and we had a complete set of blueprints for it, and
it would have been easy and cheap to simply
duplicate everything at Table Mountain. When
that money didn't come, we had preliminary
designs for a 48-inch, preliminary designs for a
60-inch.
We got none of those. And when it became obvious the
telescope was going elsewhere, in fact, I got
heavily involved in other areas, in particular in
work on comets and advanced comet missions. And
part of the problem was that I didn't have my Ph.D.,
And at that time, I had a division manager who
didn't go by what you did, but by what your
credentials were. Who was? Robert Magreblian.
And he moved me out of the slot as head of the
astronomy group and put me in charge of a group
which was doing models of the planets for the
projects. And I did that and various advanced
studies. And then from there, started studying
comet missions, got extremely interested in
comets, and began my own research program in
cometary astrophysics, and started going to
other observatories and working with other
people, and sort of divorced myself from the
astronomy program at JPL. I tried to do some work at
Table Mountain, but it was so ill-funded by the
mid-'70s that we didn't have the manpower to even
keep the auxiliary instrumentation running
properly. And so from the mid-'70s on, I worked on
advanced studies at JPL of comet missions and then
did my own research at other places like Mauna Kea
and later at Lick Observatory. That brings up an
interesting question. Through the 20s and 30s and
40s, when solar system studies in general had a bad
odor about them. It was always legitimate to study
comets. Why? Well, comets, I guess, didn't have
any thoughts on anybody's part about life and the
solar system and a little green man, and comets
were simply a phenomena that had fascinated
mankind throughout history. They were an
interesting astrophysical problem, both as to
their origin and to the way they work. What in the
heck are they? What are they made of? And why do they
behave the way they do? And their problems were
sufficiently enigmatic that they had always
fascinated even the classical stellar
astronomer, and indeed they remained a subject
that was always considered quite a legitimate one
for study. And it's sort of ironic that the very
objects which did remain of interest to the
classic stellar and galactic astronomer are the
single object to which NASA has never mounted a
mission.
What do you think killed planetary astronomy in
the early part of this century? Effectively
killed it. I know some was being done, but if you
look at the journals in 1900 and then you look at
1930, wow, is there a difference. What's the
reason, or reasons? Well, I think there are, to my
way of thinking, off the top of my head, a couple of
things can be said about it. For one thing, large
telescopes became available, which gathered a
great deal of light and allowed people to do
high-resolution spectroscopy, to go deep into
the universe studying the extragalactic
nebulae, the galaxies, the expansion of the
universe. These problems were totally
fascinating. But if you wanted to study the
planets with a large telescope, obviously you
didn't get any better resolution with the large
telescopes than you did with much smaller ones
simply because you were atmospheric seeing
limited. People in those days didn't know how much
of that seeing was created locally by
uncontrolled thermal problems. But in any case, a
big telescope wasn't that much better than a
little one for studying kind of planetary work
that people had traditionally done, which is to
say planetary detail, the kind of thing that
Percival Lowell had done. So they sort of went off
and developed new instrumentation and went off
into the universe. Now, there were always a few
people who remained in the field, including some
with the biggest telescope in the world, 100 inch
at that time. But I think it was the fascination
with the deep space problems And the fact that the
big telescopes couldn't do that much more than the
little ones could in those times on the planets
that allowed the planetary field to simply die. Do
you think any NSA headquarters tries to
micromanage scientific projects too much? Well,
not in the individual research particularly. I
mean, they manage it in the sense that They decide
how much money is available for stellar astronomy
versus planetary astronomy versus Earth. And
really, if you look at it, the only reason they
support this research at all is because of the very
complementary way that it blends in with their
spaceflight missions. But their real interest is
in the missions. And they're simply supporting
them with this ground-based research. So I think
they don't try to tell an individual what he has to
do. On the other hand, the amount of money that's
available in a given field is certainly a function
of their interest in it. Well, the universe we live
in, why, the guy who has the bucks calls the shots.
Do you think over the years the people at
headquarters really knew what was going on in
planetary astronomy, or were they playing
catch-up? Well, let's face it. Most of them were
not planetary astronomers themselves. There
have been obvious exceptions to that, yourself
among them.
But no person sitting in Washington can really
retain a feel for the work in the field. It's
virtually impossible, to my way of thinking, for a
person with a job in Washington to retain a
research program of his own or her own.
The exceptions are very forced. I think if the
people running the programs at headquarters were
handled perhaps the way section managers are in
the science sections at JPL, that is on an
alternating, rotating two-year basis, where
they remained scientists a good part of the time,
but then filled in and devoted a couple of years to
seeing after NASA's interest, maybe that would be
a solution. But it has been my experience that
generally when people go to Washington, the very,
very fine people that often go there simply after a
time become so involved in their own worries about
their programs that they lose any feel for or sight
of the real research and the real interests of the
people in the field actually doing the work.
What do you think the public thinks of planetary
astronomy and astronomy in general? I think
they're fascinated by it, probably for a lot of
wrong reasons. I'm sure that when they think of the
solar system, they're thinking, again, even in
the classic Lowellian sense of little green men,
and there's certainly a lot of fanatics out there
in the UFO field and what have you that have a lot of
interest in this sort of thing, but it's all
misplaced. On the other hand, I think the young
people find... real modern astronomy
fascinating. Obviously, again, they're
somewhat steered in that direction by the Star
Wars and Star Trek kind of phenomenon, but I think
it gives them a healthy interest in science, and I
think they're genuinely interested. I'm not sure
that it's always brought to them in the proper way.
I'm sure that many adults are don't understand it
at all and perhaps poo-poo it, but I think the
younger generation has a genuine interest in
astronomy, both solar system and deep space
astronomy. Do you think planetary astronomers
have done as good a job as they could of putting your
case across to the public and to Congress?
Probably not. Let's face it, scientists in
general are not necessarily salespeople. There
have been a few obviously very good salespeople
for planetary astronomy, like Carl Sagan. And
Carl, I think, usually has done a good job of
selling it, although there are Maybe some things
that he's done that weren't in our best interest,
but I think he's a straightforward and honest and
well-meaning guy who's done an awful lot to help
sell the space program to Congress and to the
world. I think we could use a few more, a little
different maybe, but a few more similar people.
But I'm sure that the likes of you and I have not
perhaps done our part and perhaps are not capable
of doing the sales job that needs to be done. Thirty
years ago, there was just an American
Astronomical Society. Now there's a lot of
sub-societies, particularly there's the
Division for Planetary Astronomy, which even has
its own official journal, Icarus. What are these
developments? Do you think, on the whole, that
they've been good, bad, or just inevitable? I
think they've been good in the sense that it would
have been very difficult for planetary astronomy
to grow if it had remained totally under the thumb
of the parent society. By having its own
organization and its own journal and its own
prizes, why, it could develop as an entity and a
very strong one in its own right. And I think it
would have been almost impossible for this to
happen under the thumb of the parent society.
These days, do you think that real quote-unquote
astronomers and planetary astronomers talk to
each other very much? I think they do, maybe not as
much as they should, but there is a very definite
attempt to occasionally hold meetings of the
parent society and the divisions jointly, and to
have prize winners and so on from the divisions
deliver prize lectures at the parent society. I
think there's much more appreciation for each
other today, certainly, than there was 30 years
ago.
Feelings are improving, which isn't to say that
the stellar and galactic astronomers still don't
feel that their field is the real astronomy and
more important than solar system work. And
probably a lot of them tend to lump solar system
astronomers into the class along with geologists
and meteorologists as opposed to being real
astronomers. But I think they respect one another
and are interested in each other's work to an
extent. Okay, for 35 years now, we've been going to
planets and observing them from the ground and
spacecraft and directly. Not a trace of, not a
trace of more fossil of any life anywhere in the
solar system except Earth. In particular, no
trace of life so far on Mars. Do you think that's had
a big effect on the public and on funding, a big
negative effect, or not? Oh, boy, that's hard to
say. I think that astronomers never really
expected to find any significant form of life
anywhere in our solar system. I think many,
perhaps most of them, feel that there may be some
form of life elsewhere in the galaxy and certainly
in the universe. It's an awfully big universe for
this to only have happened once. And whether you
think about this from a purely scientific point of
view or even from a religious point of view... Why
should God create such an enormous universe and
only inhabit one teeny tiny mote of it? And if you
look at it from a purely biological evolutionary
point of view, if it happened here, why can't it
have happened somewhere else? So I think most
scientists probably feel somewhere in the
universe there's life, other than here and here on
Earth. But none of us really expected to find it in
the solar system. The public in general probably
did. And some of them may be disappointed by it. And
I think that some of them are put off now, perhaps,
by people trying to oversell programs on the basis
of
looking for life, even though it is still a
legitimate thing to do to see if there's any
evidence, let's say, on Mars of... prebiotic
molecules or of any form of life ever having
existed. This is a legitimate scientific study
like any other but it's not the kind of thing that's
going to enchant the general public. They want to
see some walking and talking or at least growling.
A lot of people lately have been getting a lot of
publicity and some money for studying things like
the possibility of planets around other stars
Killer asteroids, ozone hole, ozone layer hole,
and the search for extraterrestrial
intelligence. Do you think those people are
overdoing it a bit or not? I think they're all
legitimate fields of study. I think that as
virtually every program, they are oversold in the
sense that they are giving love and motherhood
statements, which are their ultimate goal. The
implication is that these programs are going to be
solved with a few bucks in a short period of time
when, in fact, they may not really say that, but the
implication is there, whereas, in fact, most of
these are very long-range programs and are going
to have to be followed for many decades to have any
real hope of success. So I think there is a big
tendency on everyone's part to try to oversell
because, with the shortage of funds, everybody
feels they've got almost half to oversell in order
to get funded, and that's unfortunate. I mean,
every one of those programs is a legitimate
program, and it's a legitimate scientific study.
But I think they probably are oversold in that
people tend to think that they're going to get
results cheaper and sooner than they really are.
What's, in your opinion, what's the state of
planetary astronomy today in this country? Plus,
minus, zero? Well, I'm not sure what you mean by
state. Expanding? idling, sinking? It's
sinking, I think. I don't think there's any
question of that. The funding for planetary
astronomy has not increased for a decade, and
there's been no real allowance made for
inflation. I think there's enormous pressure
from the fact that any university professor is
judged in part by the number of graduates that he
has and the number of PhDs that he produces, And
you've got to figure if every individual
planetary astronomer out there in a university
produces even five or six students, and most of
them, it's probably more like 10 PhDs in the field
during their working lifetime, you can see how
rapidly the number of people in the field is going
to grow. And each of them in turn then is going to
have the same problem of getting funding and have
their own students. And so you tend to get an
exponential growth. And clearly no field can
sustain an exponential growth for a long period of
time. Planetary astronomy has done it, did it for a
couple of decades, and clearly that has to stop. So
there's tremendous pressure just from there
being too many people today for the funds that are
available. And you might argue that that's good
for the field in that you can claim that the very
best will rise to the top and be funded and But I
think it's not doing any young person a favor to
take them into planetary astronomy today. At
least you have to be honest and explain the facts of
life to them that they're going to have to be
awfully good and work awfully hard if they're to
have any real hope of succeeding in the field. Over
the years, what's JPL's attitude been? Looking at
it from the bottom, looking up, what do you think
the people... Well, what's the impression you got
of what's JPL's quote-unquote attitude towards
planetary astronomy? Necessary evil, an
ornament, or what? I think the attitude at the lab
has always been fairly good. I think they found
astronomers to be useful, well, all planetary
scientists, not just astronomers, but all of the
people in the field to be useful. a useful adjunct
in that they were around to help when questions
came up on the flight projects. And I think the
feeling has been that the science produced here
has been of sufficient quality for JPL to be quite
proud of it. And I think the attitude of senior
management at the lab towards science has always
been good. It's never been, of course, their
fundamental goal. Their fundamental goal has
always been and remains to sell new projects. So
while I think the scientists are respected and
have a place, everybody feels they have a place
here, that place is not going to be allowed to
interfere in any way with the lab's chief goals,
which are to fly missions. Do you think there's
enough support for ground-based work as opposed
to the money spent on probes by NASA?
I have to say no, in a way, in the sense that if you
actually look at the dollars spent on probes
through the last couple of decades and the dollars
spent supporting ground-based work, the amount
of knowledge that we've gained from the
ground-based work is far larger proportionally
than the money spent on it. And as long as that
continues to happen, then one has to argue that
Perhaps there should be more funding for the
ground-based work. You're getting more bang for
buck out of the ground-based stuff. Now clearly
there are many things that you cannot do from the
ground. You could never have done without the
probes. And so I'm not arguing to dismantle one in
favor of the other. I'm simply saying that I think
perhaps their balance has always been a little bit
off. They get a lot of good data. And then they have a
brief research and analysis program on that data.
And before the treasure trove that they've gained
with a probe is really worked out, the research
program is cut off and they go on to something else.
And I think that's short-sighted. And I think
similarly, the actual support of ground-based
observations has been a little lacking in, well, I
think the balance is a little off. Let me put it that
way.